Now jump ahead today. We've wiped out
over half of all the beef cattle
operations in business just over a
generation ago. We've lost 52% of them.
We've wiped out 25% of our mother cow
beef herd and the four largest packers
control today about 80% of the
marketplace and consumers in 2024
paid about $8.23
per pound for beef. In 2021,
the packer and the retailer received
over 60% or 60 cents of every consumer
beef dollar and the producer received
less than 40 cents. So here's the here's
the question. How in a competitive
market could that have happened? How
could a competitive forces in the
marketplace completely reversed the
competitive allocation of the consumer
beef dollar within the entire beef
supply chain?
The answer to that question is it can't.
[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, what do you
eat more of? Eggs or beef?
You know, I was just thinking um I want
to eat more beef in my my life. I
probably do eat more eggs ultimately,
but like beef is just so good. Beef is
the best food there is in the entire
world. I truly believe that and every
time I eat beef, I think about why don't
I eat this all the time? It's so good.
It's so satisfying. All these nutrients.
I don't have this impulse to snack and
eat garbage afterwards. I want to eat
more beef. I'm pretty sure I eat more
beef than eggs at this point. Like I
will have the occasional omelet and I
mix a lot of eggs into like Asian noodle
dishes and things like that, but not
that
>> Why I aspire to live the Tracy to have
the Tracy Alloway diet. Okay, well
speaking of beef
>> Except it's really expensive these days.
Yes, this is exactly it. So I'm sure
everyone listening to this podcast at
this point has heard about rising beef
prices in the US. There are a lot of
headlines flying around um constantly in
recent days about this. So for instance,
we're recording this on October 30th and
earlier this week, President Trump was
tweeting about how he wants beef prices
to be lower. He's also been talking
about buying beef from Argentina. Yeah.
It is very much in the news. There's
also the whole soybean drama with China.
I think it's funny because in that Trump
post, he said "Cattle ranchers should
appreciate how good things are going
because high beef prices will bring them
down." Um there was just a lot and I've
said this before on the show, which is
that I think the ultimate marker of
civilization is the amount of beef or
protein that you can buy with an hour's
work, that the median person or the
average person can buy with an hour's
work. And I think when it's going
backwards, we should be very disturbed.
So setting aside, you know, I'm very
fortunate. I can probably afford to eat
as much beef as I want, but the price of
ground beef, I'm looking it up on the
terminal now, it's like tripled since
2010. It was like $4 around the
pandemic, now it's over $6. I think
these are extremely serious issues. I
will say I don't think we need to be
quite as obsessed with protein.
Americans especially, we already eat a
lot of protein, okay? Eat more fiber.
I'm not saying we need to be obsessed.
Actually, I do think the protein craze
may be a little out of hand. I just
think this is like a very good measure
of the advance of sort of a wealthy
society that protein gets more
affordable. I'm going to get you a cow
share for Christmas. Thank you. All
right. Uh well, I am happy to say we do
in fact have the perfect guest. We're
going to be speaking with Bill Bullard.
He is the CEO of R-CALF USA. So Bill,
thank you so much for coming on Odd
Lots. Glad to be here. Thank you.
Thank you also for actually looking the
part of a cattle rancher. We really
appreciate that.
>> can deny that we're talking to the
perfect guest. All right. So why don't
we start really simple? What have you
observed about beef prices just, you
know, in the past few months or so?
Well, we've seen beef prices increasing
as you've indicated and we see cattle
pricing also increasing as you
indicated. So we now have a positive
relationship between the price of beef
and the price of cattle and we are a
competitive
industry. We do not rely on government
price supports. We're the single largest
segment of American agriculture. The
cattle industry generates about a
hundred billion dollars a year in cash
receipts. So it's it's larger than any
other commodity, corn, wheat, cotton,
dairy.
Um and and we're we rely on competitive
market forces, but we have not had
competitive market forces until very
recently and that's where we need to get
into the history of why beef prices are
high. And can I ask very quickly, you
said there's now a positive relationship
between cattle prices and beef prices.
Is that not always the case?
That certainly has not been the case,
especially since 2015.
We saw an inverse relationship. We saw
beef prices heading skyward beginning in
and while beef prices were increasing,
cattle prices were falling. And this is
really odd in an industry where the only
ingredient in beef is cattle. So you
would expect there to be a harmonious
synchronous relationship, a positive
relationship between beef prices and
cattle prices.
One of the things is I discovered on the
terminal back during the pandemic. I
learned all these things. We actually
have an
index on the
terminal, the Hedgers Edge the Hedgers
Edge Beef Packer Margin, which I imagine
to some extent reflects that spread and
we do see it rise generally up really
through 2021.
It's actually starting to compress quite
a bit. But just actually why is that
like
what explains what explains why these
things can move in different directions?
What is the added factor in the price of
beef that is not the price of cattle?
Right. So let's go back to just over a
generation. We'll go back in 1980. At
the time we had 1.3 million beef cattle
farmers and ranchers in the United
States. We had about 37 million cows in
our mother cow herd. Beef prices that
consumers paid were about $2.40 per
pound. And we at that time we had the
four largest packers in the industry
controlling 36% of the industry. So if
we think about how the beef industry
works, it's the consumer beef dollar
that has to be allocated along the
entire supply chain. So back in 1980,
every time a consumer spent a dollar on
on on beef, that dollar was allocated by
competitive market forces and over 60
cents of that dollar went back to the
live cattle producer, the farmer and
rancher and the cattle feeder.
And less than 40 cents went back to the
processing part of the beef industry and
that's to the retailer and the packer.
So the producer was receiving the
majority share, which made sense because
they kept that animal
and for 15 to 18 months before it was
slaughtered and converted to beef and
the beef packer only kept the animal for
about seven days and the retailer kept
it for the shortest amount of period
possible. So but the point was is that
when consumers were paying $2.40 per
pound for beef, 60 cents of that dollar
was going back to the producer and only
less than 40% 40 cents was going back to
the processor and the retailer. Now jump
ahead today. We've wiped out over half
of all the beef cattle operations in
business just
over a generation ago. We've lost 52% of
them. We've wiped out 25% of our mother
cow beef herd and the four largest
packers control today about 80% of the
marketplace and consumers in 2024
paid about $8.23
per pound for beef. And now in 2020
2021, just a couple years ago,
the allocation that the competitive
market was making in the marketplace was
completely tipped on its head. In 2021,
the packer and the retailer received
over 60% or 60 cents of every consumer
beef dollar and the producer received
less than 40 cents.
So here's the here's the question. How
in a competitive market could that have
happened? How could a competitive forces
in the marketplace completely
reversed the competitive allocation of
the consumer beef dollar within the
entire beef supply chain? The answer to
that question is it can't. If our market
was competitive, that could never have
happened. That raises the concerns that
we've been struggling with for the past
several decades. Our industry is in a
state of crisis and it has been. And
what has happened is just because of
industry concentration and
consolidation, the ability of the
multinational meat packers and retailers
to exert buying power upstream in the
supply chain and the fact that we've
entered free trade agreements that have
allowed the meat packers and retailers
to access beef from around the world and
displace domestic production because the
beef that we import from Argentina,
Brazil, Uruguay, Nicaragua, Costa Rica,
Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Mexico,
it's a perfect substitute for domestic
product. So the more we import,
the less we have the ability and
capacity to maintain domestic production
of this very important protein source,
which is beef. And so what we see today
is a dysfunctional marketplace as I
described before. Since 2017, we saw
beef prices going up that consumers were
paying in the retail store, we saw
cattle prices going down. The latest
census shows that just in a 5-year
period from 2017 to 2022, we lost
106,000
beef cattle operations. Farmers and
ranchers exited the industry during that
period. And the reason that that's
happened is because they've suffered
long-term lack of profitability. It's
because their market is dysfunctional.
It's because imports have displaced our
domestic production and our opportunity
to expand. And now we've hit a a huge
market shock, an economic shock to the
market. And that was the latest drought
that occurred in the latter part of
2020.
>> This is what I was going to ask. So,
just to we're going to talk more about
industry consolidation for sure and um,
you know, I'm looking for instance at a
headline right now about Walmart
tightening its grip on the beef market
by setting up a new plant. But, just to
play devil's advocate for a second,
how much of this is just down to pure
input costs like grain going up or, you
know, the drought that you just
mentioned or labor costs?
>> At least especially the move that we've
seen over the last year, which I'm sure
which cannot obviously be explained by
multi-decade trends. By what? By
multi-decade a multi-decade trend I
believe that is real etc. but let's talk
about some of these things that have
happened in the last year specifically
or the last whatever 18 months.
So, what we've seen is our cattle
supplies have tightened to the lowest
levels in 75 years. We have extremely
tight supply situation, but we have
incredibly strong beef demand.
Consumers' willingness to pay for beef
appears unbounded. As prices have
increased, consumers have still cleared
the grocery store shelves with the
product. And so, the latest the latest
drought that occurred had accelerated
the ongoing liquidation of our US beef
cattle or beef cattle inventory. And and
that's why our supplies are so tight.
Uh, and yet you've got incredible
consumer demand for beef. And so, we
have seen a spike in prices because of
that strong demand. Consumers continue
to be willing to pay more for beef. And
but that is not how our market has been
functioning for the past decade. Let's
say the rain come back, there's no
drought etc. What are we talking about
for a timeline? Again, setting aside the
structural things, what are we talking
about for a realistic timeline for
getting back to where we think like,
"Oh, we are comfortable with the level
of cattle stock that we we are happy
with the level of cattle stock that we
have in this country."
Right. So, we currently produce about 3
billion pounds less beef than what is
consumed in America. Okay. So, the
largest segment of American agriculture
actually under produces for the domestic
market. And because of the long
biological cycle of cattle,
it takes about 3 years to decide to hold
back cattle to breed and then to have a
calf and then to raise that calf to
slaughter weight over a period of 15 to
18 months. And so, in order for our
industry to begin an expansion phase,
uh, we would need a price point that
incentivizes producers to make the
investment to build a herd. And
unfortunately, that that price point
occurred back around 2023.
We should be in an aggressive expansion
phase now except that instead of
uh, domestic consumers relying on US
producers, we've increased the volume of
beef imports to record volumes in 2024.
That's displacing our domestic
production. And that increase of of
imports is not distinguished in the
marketplace. Consumers can't tell if the
beef they're buying is foreign beef or
domestic beef. Mhm. That puts the power
and control in the hands of the packers
and the importers and retailers. So,
your question was how much of this had
to do with increase in input costs?
Well, the increase in input costs
reduces the the margin that US cattle
producers receive at at any given price
point. And we've seen increased
production costs certainly. But the
point is is that cattle producers do not
set the price of beef. The The price of
beef is set by the packers and the
retailers who sell to the consumer. The
producer is a price taker in this market
and has been for decades. They have
cattle, they offer them for sale, they
accept the reject a bid by the packer,
and they're producing a perishable
product. So, when an animal is ready for
slaughter, ready to be fabricated into a
beef product, the producer who fed that
cattle has a week or two to three week
window in which to market the animal,
otherwise it degrades in quality.
Uh, it adds fat instead of muscle. And
as a result, the producer has um,
very limited bargaining power in a
highly concentrated market as we have
now. And when they're selling into a
market that's controlled where four
packers control 80% of the market, uh,
they they are uh, victims of the abuse
of market power that emanates uh,
inherently from such a highly
concentrated marketing structure.
So, the so the increase in production
costs reduce the profitability of
producers, but it doesn't it doesn't
affect the producers' ability to market
cattle. Uh, that would be the demand for
live cattle and the demand for my live
cattle is offset and undercut by
increased volumes of imports. What's the
relationship between beef availability
and
the dairy industry, dairy cows? So, one
of the reason I bring it up, you look
confused, but the reason I bring it up
is cuz again, I Joe's going to get sick
of me mentioning this, but I've been
reading this like
70-year-old book on small-scale farming.
>> I hate when people are always bringing
up books that they read. I know, isn't
that crazy?
>> bring it up what No, I was just joking.
And you know, there's a chapter in it
about whether or not you want to go into
cattle farming so or cattle ranching for
beef or if you want to raise dairy cows.
And one of the things that you learn
from this is that every dairy cow
usually becomes a beef cow at some point
once it reaches, you know,
once it's milk production starts to dry
up, it usually gets sold for slaughter.
So, what's what's the relationship or
the interaction like there?
Well, historically, what you described
is true. As the dairy animals uh, have
exceeded their production lifespan, they
are marketed as cull animals into the
beef supply chain. And uh, it's a very
lean meat product that is mixed with the
higher quality trim that we obtain over
our grain-fed animals that are fed in
feedlots produced exclusively for beef.
So, there wasn't much competition
between the beef industry and the and
the dairy industry. But here recently,
as we increased our technology and
genetic uh, abilities, uh, we have begun
to raise uh, more male beef uh, dairy
animals and are bringing them into
feedlots and feeding those animals and
they are now beginning to compete with
the beef cattle farmer and rancher in
the marketplace. And this is a
relatively recent phenomenon uh, that's
been occurring in our industry. Wait,
why is that happening? Yeah, say more.
Well, it's happening because there's
there's a profit opportunity uh, to sell
dairy cattle into the beef supply chain.
And and of course that will compete
directly with our America's farmers and
ranchers who not only will have to now
compete with this increase in the the
dairy beef sector, but they're already
dealing with this undifferentiated
cheaper import flood uh, that has been
negatively affecting their price
profitability in this industry.
Say a little bit more about okay, cattle
prices have gone up.
And so, in theory that as you said, in
theory that should uh, incent more
investment etc. but it's Talk a little
bit more about some of the input costs
that a cattle rancher faces.
When making these decisions to expand
this their stock.
So, so one of the first factors is the
availability of sufficient land to raise
the animal because in the beef cattle
industry, the animal is primarily raised
on grass. Uh,
after an after a calf is born and it
suckles the mother for about four to six
months on grass and before it is moved
downstream in the supply chain to become
a yearling animal and ultimately
delivered to a feedlot where it's fed
until it's slaughter weight. And so, the
input costs include the fuel
with which to run an operation. It
includes the veterinary expenses for
keeping your animals healthy. It It
includes the land costs of maintaining
sufficient forage supplies for the
animal. It includes the cost of
equipment to put up hay and grain with
which to feed those cattle. Uh,
and it in many instances it includes
labor. However, most of the family farm
and ranches here in the United States
are just that. They're family farms and
ranches
attempting to raise cattle and they
they're experiencing increased input
costs. You know, we could talk about
fertilizer costs, too. Mhm. Well,
but ultimately, the costs have increased
due to inflation. Yeah. And that
squeezes the margin that they receive at
whatever price point that they're
experiencing.
In terms of industry consolidation, the
fact that there are basically, you know,
four gatekeepers to beef processing in
the US, how did we actually get here?
Well, we got here because we were lax in
enforcing our US antitrust laws. Uh, the
Sherman Act of 1890, the Clayton Act, I
think it was about 1914.
>> Sorry, the last time we spoke about
eggs in a big series about chicken, we
talked a lot about antitrust. Right.
Well, and that's a huge problem. In
fact, it's no coincidence that as beef
prices are increasing, we just saw a
settlement in a national class action
suit in which two of the largest
packers, Tyson and Cargill, have
purportedly agreed to settle the
consumers' complaints about beef price
fixing to the tune of about 87 and 1/2
million dollars. Um so, what we have in
our industry is a
decades-long lack of enforcement of
antitrust laws. That allowed the meat
packers back in the 1980s to engage in
what was called merger mania. We saw an
unprecedented volume number amount of
mergers and acquisitions in in the beef
cattle industry, and it was through that
process and no enforcement of antitrust
laws that the meat packers were able to
ex-
achieve this extremely high level of
concentration. And and in addition to
that, Congress realized over 100 years
ago that independent livestock producers
were really vulnerable to the monopsony
power, the buying power of the
concentrated meat packers. So, they
passed what was called the Packers and
Stockyards Act in 1921. And this this
was to ensure that the meat packers, not
only could they not engage in anti-
trust activities such as monopolization
and price fixing, but this act also said
they couldn't engage in practices of
procuring livestock from producers that
was patently unfair. Um and so, this
important act actually helped to
bolster the United States' ability to to
ensure antitrust violations were not
occurring in the marketplace, and it
gave the independent producer recourse
in the event that they were treated
unfairly or deceptively by the
concentrated market. The problem is,
just like our antitrust laws that
collected dust on the shelf, so too did
the Packers and Stockyards Act. And yet
today, the US Department of Agriculture
has not promulgated the rules necessary
in order to implement and enforce this
over 100-year-old Packers and Stockyards
Act that was intended to protect
independent livestock producers from the
abusive market power of the dominant
beef packers.
Do the children of ranchers want to
become ranchers? There is a There is a
popular country song that came out in
2023 by Cody Johnson called Dirt Cheap.
The entire premise of the song is about
this dad, and he this real estate
developer offers him all this land, and
he's about to take the money, and then
he gets sad thinking about his kids will
never be running around on this. And
when I hear the song, I got a little
cynical. I was like, yeah, but that
daughter is going to sell the land when
she gets older. So, what's this? Like,
she's going to move to a big city. But
are there issues in your industry of
like the next generation of ranchers
like, no, I want to sell this land to a
data center, or I want to sell this land
to a housing subdivision so that I can
like go work in finance in New York
City.
When you have an industry like ours that
has lost over half its participants in
the course of just over a generation,
>> Yeah. it's not unsurprising that the
average age of the US farmer and rancher
is now somewhere's north of 58 years of
age.
>> Wow. And one of the And we hear
anecdotal information all the time about
ranch families who have struggled under
a economic cost price squeeze for
decades. Their children have watched.
They've encouraged their children to do
something else other than to ranch.
>> And that's a huge problem that we have
because part of this expansion expansion
phase will require us to attract new
entrants, to attract aspiring cattle
farmers and ranchers into the industry.
That's not happening. And even though I
said that the price point has was
sufficient to incentivize the expansion
over a year ago, we're not expanding.
And we're not expanding because our
cattle producers has recently witnessed
a complete collapse in cattle prices
when we were about where we're at today.
And that was just as recently as 2014
and 15. Wow. At that time, we had the
highest nominal cattle prices in the
history of our industry. And beef
consumers were then paying the highest
nominal beef prices in history. And
every analyst, government and private
alike, said the cattle producer is going
to receive another 3 years of very
strong prices because of that long
biological cycle of cattle.
>> a very This strikes me as a very
important data point. The fact that the
rancher has been trained essentially
to expect that high prices won't
necessarily sustain themselves, right?
You could
>> It's the boom bust cycle.
>> Yeah, the boom bust. We we talk about
this across industries. It's like great
that the price is there, but are is the
price going to be there in 3 years when
that when that cow is ready to be sold
for meat? It's a very It's It's not
enough to just have temporarily high
prices.
Well, well, that's right, and that's
exactly what happened at the end of 2014
and 2015 when everyone believed that our
cattle prices would stay strong, they
inexplicably collapsed, and they
collapsed further and faster than any
time in history. And they collapsed
until we hit that point in 2017
when suddenly consumer demand was
driving beef prices higher, and the meat
packers were paying less and less for
cattle cattle prices. And so, we had
this inverse, completely dysfunctional
situation in the marketplace, and
producers were hurting. That's the
period we lost 106,000 producers from
2017 to 2022.
And only now, after this latest drought
that we shrunk the herd size to such an
ultra-low level, have we seen the cattle
prices begin to once again respond
favorably to the latent forces of
competition in the industry. They began
to chase beef prices upward, and we've
seen that more acutely here in the last
couple few months as beef prices have
increased. But the the fact is is that
we have not enforced antitrust laws, and
what we need to do now is determine to
what extent are today's beef prices
caused by antitrust behavior in the
marketplace, not from the cattle
producer who's a price taker in the
marketplace, but by the multinational
beef packers and retailers that are
actually controlling the beef market
here in the United States. Well,
speaking of that and expansion, one
thing we have seen is new entrants, new
corporate entrants moving into the beef
industry, and I mentioned Walmart
earlier. What's the thinking behind
that? Is it just a vertical integration
play, or
what's the additive for a company like
Walmart to get into beef?
Well, you think about our all of our
livestock sectors. So, we'll start with
the poultry sector. That sector was
vertically integrated in the '60s and
'70s from egg to plate. It's the
corporations, what we call the
integrators, were controlling the
production. The farmers owned their
farms and ranchers, they invested in the
capital, but the integrators dictated
how the farmers would raise those
chickens. In fact, the integrator owned
the chickens and essentially hired the
farmer to raise them for for the
integrator. That model was then applied
in the '80s and '90s to our hog sector.
Back in 1980, when we had 1.3 million
cattle producers, we also had 667,000
hog producers scattered all across the
United States raising hogs. Uh but
today, we're down to 65,000. We wiped
out 90% of our hog producers because
that industry, the corporations involved
in that industry, began to follow the
chicken model. And so, we reduced the
number of participants, and they began
to raise hogs under a highly
concentrated situation, and it's
completely vertical vertically
integrated from birth to plate. The
cattle industry is the last frontier
frontier for these major global meat
packers.
And it's because of the forage
requirements and the long biological
cycle of cattle that has has prevented
them from engaging in the vertical
integration model, which we call
chickenization. And we're trying to
prevent the chickenization of our cattle
industry. Uh but the reason Walmart's
getting into it is because it's
profitable. So, Walmart has decided it's
going to vertically integrate the beef
cattle industry. It's going to direct
what genetics a farmer rancher has to
use in order to raise the animal.
Walmart will dictate the production
practices and feeding, and then Walmart
will provide the marketing outlet for
the producers, and then Walmart will
sell that resulted beef product to the
consumer. Wait, really is
chickenization. It's the tournament
system, basically. Well, and it will
lead to that. So, the tournament system
is a pricing mechanism that greatly
benefits the integrator and allows them
to buy the chickens from the farmer and
pay less for their managerial skills in
raising the chicken for them.
And that's that's the concern we have
with the Walmart model. Walmart wants to
lock up this
segment of the beef industry, and they
want to eliminate
all these cattle producers just have
been eliminated hog producers were
eliminated in the hog industry, and
poultry producers were eliminated. And
the first step in the process is you do
away with you eliminate the competitive
cash market. That's what allows them to
vertically integrate an industry, and
we're seeing in that in the cattle
industry. Our cash market has been
shrinking at an alarming rate, and as we
allow this to continue, we will soon see
even more vertical integration. What
this means is we're going to hollow out
rural communities all across America,
just as we have been doing for the past
four decades. And that's because we will
eliminate profitable opportunities for
our independent family-scale farmers and
ranchers by eliminating the cash market,
by dismantling the competitive
infrastructure, and simply handing the
industry over to a highly centralized,
highly concentrated beef packing and
retailing industry.
Uh I'm going to veer into some sensitive
territory here. I don't know anything
about
how you lean politically. I also don't
particularly care, it's fine. All that
being said,
I think that, you know, I have
stereotypes and I think of I imagine
what the typical
uh cattle rancher, how they are
politically, guy wearing a cowboy hat,
speaking with a a country accent. I
would have a presumption about how they
might vote in a typical Again, not you
specifically, but you know, I have my
stereotypes, etc. And they're probably
true. Has the uh current administration,
you know, talking He's been talking to
you guys via his Twitter social account.
He wants you to lower prices, but also
appreciate him for the high prices,
little unclear. So, this current
administration
uh been a friend to the to the
independent cattle rancher?
Well, what independent cattle producers
needed is they needed our imports to be
managed, not to hand to the beef packers
the ability to source whatever volume of
imports they want to displace our
domestic production, to prevent our
domestic production from keeping up with
growth growth in population, which is
what has occurred here. And so, what we
needed was the implementation of tariffs
and tariff rate quotas on countries that
persistently maintain a trade surplus
with with the United States. In other
words, countries from which we buy large
volumes of beef, but we sell to them
very little. So, we have been calling
for tariffs and tariff rate quotas. And
tariff rate quotas, of course, are
limits on the volume of beef that any
country can export to the United States.
And so, when President Trump took his
second term, that's the first thing he
began doing was imposing tariffs. And
for an industry that underproduces in
the domestic market, we need the tariff
provide our industry the space to expand
and increase production. So, we were
strongly supported the tariffs. When we
saw Brazilian imports absolutely explode
in 2025 and even last year, we were
thankful that the president imposed a
50% tariff on Brazilian exports of beef,
because that that was going to further
keep our industry awash in these
price-depressing imports.
So, but when the president announced
this idea to lower consumer beef prices
with by increasing Argentinian
Argentina's beef
import quota rate, we believe that he
was
misguided. He was misinformed as to how
the market structure worked. I don't
think he was aware that our industry has
just gone through years of depressed
prices while consumers were experiencing
record beef prices. I don't think he
understood how severe the lack of
antitrust enforcement has adversely
affected our industry and caused our
industry to shrink. And so, producers
are very, very concerned right now,
because we're at the price point where
we should be expanding, but we're not
expanding as we should be because of the
concern for the
the
market failure in our industry that has
not been corrected. It's because we're
not certain anymore whether the
president is in fact going to begin to
manage these imports or if he was just
going to let these packers continue to
import whatever volume of beef and
cattle they want to displace our
domestic production. And they do this
without informing consumers where that
beef is from. There is no country of
origin label on the imported beef
product. So, consumers can't choose to
support the domestic supply chain versus
the foreign supply chain. And that's why
we're urging Congress to pass mandatory
country of origin labeling immediately.
And I think this will help to at least
mitigate the negative impact that
increased imports from Argentina will
have on our industry, because then we
can go to the consumer and ask them to
choose the higher quality USA-produced
beef and support US cattle farmers and
ranchers. Look, I totally get where
you're coming from, but I, you know, I
live in New York City and I have
children to feed. And one of my children
loves beef a lot. And the vast majority
of Americans are not cattle ranchers
by any stretch. So, like, what is the,
you know, again, I understand that you
have a constituency that you represent
and you want to make your case. Why
should the the vast majority of the
country, which are beef consumers, get
no benefit from higher cattle prices,
get no benefit from higher beef prices?
Why shouldn't we want the either imports
channel or the Walmart, which frankly
has a long history of driving prices
down in almost any category they enter,
they're sort of famously a low-cost
seller, why shouldn't we support these
trends?
Well, look at any other sector in the
American economy. So, we do import large
volumes of goods from China, for
example, and a consumer can go to the
grocery store and see a China-priced
product labeled as China product of
China. Or they could buy a USA product,
and typically the USA product is going
to cost more. But consumers have a
choice. They can choose to purchase the
cheaper product if they want to. Now,
jump to the beef industry. Consumers
have no choice. The product is
undifferentiated. The meat packers are
importing this beef from Australia, New
Zealand, and these 20 different
countries I talked about earlier.
They're importing them cheaper than what
we can produce it here, but there's no
label on it. What there is on it is a US
inspection sticker, leading unsuspecting
consumers to believe, "Well, that must
be a domestic product." And so, because
the consumer can't choose between the
cheaper foreign product and the more
expensive USA-produced product, there's
no price saving for the consumer,
because the packers and the retailers
will price it identical, because they
don't have to distinguish it. So, they
pocket the increased profitability of
buying low and selling high in the most
affluent beef consuming market in the
world, and that's the United States of
America. That's That's just an example
of our dysfunctional market. Consumers
have not benefited from these increased
volumes of imports. Instead, these
increased volumes of imports have
reduced demand for our domestic cattle,
driving hundreds of thousands of cattle
producers out of the industry over the
past four decades.
Can I start a beef processing plant?
Why don't Why can't I go into it? Like,
it seems like a very profitable
business, certainly if you're JBS or
someone like that, you seem to be making
a lot of money. Why don't we have new
entrants?
So, you have four packers controlling
80% of the fed cattle market, meaning
they also control about 80% of the boxed
beef market, meaning they've got
long-term and short-term contracts with
the major retailers. They have shelf
space with those retailers. So, if
you're a small packing plant trying to
get started, how are you going to market
your beef? When you're marketing into
such a highly concentrated, consolidated
market that has where the retailer has
long-term contracts with the largest,
dominant global beef packers, how are
you going to access the marketplace? So,
we've had lots of smaller meat packers
try to start up. It it requires a huge
capital outlay to do so. Nevertheless,
the government actually, during the past
administration, has been encouraging
their growth and development. But
they're struggling. They're struggling
because they have difficulty in
marketing their product. Even if they're
marketing a a high-quality product,
they're marketing into a
commodity-structured marketplace. And
the advantage falls to the meat packers.
So, until and unless we enforce our
market our antitrust laws and our fair
competition laws, we will continue to
see these upstarts experiencing severe
difficulty in in finding a
profitable marketing outlet for their
product.
You know, I Like I said, I really like
beef. Everyone's into protein these
days, though. We We talked about this
recently on another episode. Protein is
really hot. Animal protein in particular
is really hot. There's a lot of
influencers and people with podcasts,
and they say things like, "Eat more red
meat." And our attitudes about red meat
have changed. When I was growing up,
that was scary. Oh, don't cut back on
your red meat. Now, it's like, "Oh, red
meat is like the healthiest thing you
can eat." I don't know if that's true,
but a lot of people would say that. Um
how much of the prices that we pay,
whether it's for price of cattle or the
end price of ground beef or whatever
steak, is about the secular trend
towards people wanting to have more
animal protein in their diets?
Well, sure. So, I I I think it's a huge
factor. I think there are a number of
factors contributing to the consumers'
increased demand and willingness to pay
more for beef. And I think therein lies
the answer to the problem. If we enforce
our anti-
trust laws and let the market signals
flow in our industry, we will begin to
expand, and our production will soon hit
an equilibrium with the consumer demand,
and we would see prices subside. In
fact, if consumers are unwilling to pay
current prices for beef, they would
shift to other protein sources like like
lamb, chicken, and pork, and you would
see the price point from the retailers
begin to fall, and you would see
the high beef prices subside, and then
uh
actually, but if the government causes
this to happen, if the government
interferes and forces the demand for
live cattle to decline, we're not going
to increase the size of our US cattle
herd, and America will become
increasingly dependent on foreign
sources for the beef. Right now, in
2024, about 22% of all the beef
available in the US market was imported
product. And if we look at our ship our
sister industry, the sheep industry,
which is the direction our cattle
industry is going, in 2024, 73% of all
the lamb consumed in America came from
Australia and New Zealand. We've We've
decimated our domestic sheep industry.
Now we're Now government has its sights
on the cattle industry, and increasing
imports without any product
differentiation in the marketplace will
simply exacerbate the ongoing shrinking
of our cattle producer in terms of the
number of participants, number of
cattle, and the number of marketing
outlets.
We're going to have to leave it there.
Bill Bullard I just realized Bullard,
nominative determinism, right?
>> Excellent.
>> You had to go into cattle ranching. Um
thank you so much for coming on Odd
Lots.
My pleasure. Thank you very much.
>> great, Bill. Thank you so much. Joe,
that was really interesting. And
definitely, you know, closely related to
the chicken series that we did. Um and
again, it seems to be that
chickenization theme running through
agriculture. I hadn't realized that
cows, cattle ranching, were basically
like the last frontier didn't realize it
either. And I, to be honest, I would
have already assumed it had been more or
less on that. I actually think the the
Walmart thing is very interesting
because um
on the one hand, people look at an
entity like Walmart and they're like,
"Oh, here's this monopsony player. It's
going to drive so much power." On the
other hand, you say, "Here is a new
market entrant." This is It's like,
"Oh, here is the market has just gotten
more competitive." I think it's an
interesting gut check for people who
want to like think about like market
competition, that when you read a
headline, "Walmart is going to get into
beef processing," do you read that as
like bad or good? Because
you asked, "Why aren't there more
entrants?" Well, here's a new entrant
coming in.
I have to say, I shop at Walmart. I buy
beef. I buy those big Have you ever seen
the big like uh long packages of ground
beef? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. I love
those. Yeah, yeah. They're pretty good,
actually. I am kind of floored that
there's no country of origin label on
these. I never thought about that. I am
a little skeptical it'll change much.
Like, if Would you Like, would you
Would you spend meaningfully more or
less on beef, presuming you expect that
it was like healthier or whatever that
it was safely
uh arrived?
>> Yeah. Well, what I would say is I do
shop at Walmart, but I shop at Walmart
generally for bulk beef. And if I'm
looking for the really good stuff, I
will go to an independent farmer, of
which there are many in Connecticut, and
I realize like not everyone has that
luxury, and I will try to get the good
beef.
Uh I might try to get the good beef,
too. It might come from Japan. Uh Don't
they like treat their cows really well?
Like they like They like give their cows
like beer and all that stuff.
Yeah. No, I think I love talking about
animal industry economics. There's a lot
of tension. I will say one other thing,
which is, you know, I asked that
question about like, "Well, why should
we care?" The beef consuming part The
beef consuming part of the world, which
is the of the country, which is the vast
majority of the country, the US used to
run a very big uh trade surplus in food
stuffs. Only very recently, in the last
couple of years, has that turned into
deficit.
Uh it's probably a source of some
concern to me that like we no longer
uh can domestically satisfy all of our
food needs.
Well, if you're worried about domestic
semiconductor capacity, then you
probably should be worried about food
capacity.
>> I think there are some I
some overlap issues.
>> eat the chips, Joe. Oh, except for
potato chips.
>> Except the uh except the other chips
that we can eat. I don't know. I think
there are some I think there are some
things to worry about or think about
with food that are a little different, a
little similar, that maybe we should
talk about more at some point.
Absolutely. All right. Shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at the Stalwart. For
more Odd Lots content, you should check
out our daily newsletter. That's on
bloomberg.com/odd
lots. We also have a Discord where you
can chat about all these topics with
fellow listeners. That's at
discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoyed this
conversation, then please like or leave
a comment or, better yet, subscribe.
Thanks for watching.
[Music]